research/zigbee/devices/tuya-ts004f/README.md, before:

# Tuya TS004F - Comprehensive Device Research

Complete analysis of the TS004F rotary knob based on 147 captured ZHA events across 15 distinct physical actions.

---

## Quick Links

### Research Documents
- **[Event Catalog](research/ts004f-event-catalog.md)** - Detailed analysis of all 15 actions with automation examples
- **[Event Mapping (YAML)](research/ts004f-event-mapping.yaml)** - Structured machine-readable reference
- **[Event Coverage Audit](../../../../ha-assets/blueprints/tuya-ts004f/event-coverage-audit.md)** - Blueprint completeness analysis
- **[Blueprint Comparison](../../../../ha-assets/blueprints/tuya-ts004f/blueprint-comparison.md)** - Analysis vs community versions

### Captured Data
- **[Example Log](captured-logs/example-capture.log)** - Raw event capture from test session

### Ready-to-Use
- **[Enhanced Blueprint](../../../../ha-assets/blueprints/tuya-ts004f/)** - Production-ready automation blueprint

---

## Key Research Findings

### 🔴 Critical Discovery: Mode 2 Breaks Dimming

The device has two modes (triple-click to switch):

| Mode | switch_mode | Behavior | Recommendation |
|------|-------------|----------|----------------|
| **Mode 1** | 0 | Full cluster 8 support (dimming works) | ✅ **Use this!** |
| **Mode 2** | 1 | NO cluster 8 events (dimming broken) | ❌ **Avoid!** |

**Impact:** Existing community blueprints don't detect mode switches, leading to user confusion when dimming mysteriously stops working.

---

### 🎯 Speed Detection Parameters

Rotation events include speed indicators:

| Parameter | Value | Meaning | Blueprint Usage |
|-----------|-------|---------|-----------------|
| `step_mode` | 0 | RIGHT/clockwise (brightness up) | Direction |
| `step_mode` | 1 | LEFT/counter-clockwise (brightness down) | Direction |
| `step_size` | 13 | Single slow notch | ~6-7% brightness change |
| `step_size` | 26-52 | Fast rotation | Larger brightness jumps |
| `step_size` | 78-91+ | Very fast rotation | Maximum accumulation |
| `transition_time` | 1 | Fast rotation | 0.3s transition |
| `transition_time` | 2 | Moderate rotation | 0.5s transition |
| `transition_time` | 3 | Slow rotation | 0.8s transition |

**Finding:** Community blueprints only check `transition_time == 1`, mapping 67% of rotations incorrectly.

---

### 🐛 Double-Trigger Bug in Community Blueprints

Rotation generates 3 events:
1. `right` or `left` (directional indicator)
2. `rotate_type` (redundant directional info)
3. `step` (the actual dimming command)

**Bug:** Community blueprints trigger on `right`/`left` commands, causing:
- Mode 1: Both user action AND dimming fire (double-trigger)
- Mode 2: Only user action fires (expected, but inconsistent)

**Fix:** Only trigger on `step` commands (cluster 8).

---

### 📊 Event Clusters

| Cluster ID | Name | Purpose |
|------------|------|---------|
| 6 | OnOff | Button presses, directional indicators, mode switching |
| 8 | LevelControl | Brightness dimming (Mode 1 rotation) |
| 768 | ColorControl | Color temperature/hue (press + rotate) |

**Key Insight:** Press + rotate uses cluster 768, NOT cluster 8. Separate automation required.

---

## Complete Action Mapping

### Button Actions (Cluster 6)

| Physical Action | Primary Event | Secondary Events | Timing |
|----------------|---------------|------------------|--------|
| Single press | `remote_button_short_press` | `press_type: 0`, `toggle` | ~250ms between |
| Double press | `remote_button_double_press` | `press_type: 1`, `on` | ~250ms between |
| Long press | `remote_button_long_press` | `press_type: 2`, color commands | During hold |

### Rotation Actions (Mode 1)

| Physical Action | Events Generated | Best Trigger |
|----------------|------------------|--------------|
| Rotate right (any speed) | `right`, `rotate_type`, `step` | `step` with `step_mode: 0` |
| Rotate left (any speed) | `left`, `rotate_type`, `step` | `step` with `step_mode: 1` |

### Press + Rotate (Color Control)

| Physical Action | Events Generated | Best Trigger |
|----------------|------------------|--------------|
| Press + rotate right | `right`, `rotate_type`, `step_color_temp`, `long_press` | `step_color_temp` with `step_mode: 1` |
| Press + rotate left | `left`, `rotate_type`, `step_color_temp`, `long_press` | `step_color_temp` with `step_mode: 3` |

### Mode Switching

| Physical Action | Event Generated |
|----------------|----------------|
| Triple-click | `attribute_updated` with `switch_mode: 0 or 1` |

---

## Test Methodology

### Test Equipment
- **Device:** TS004F (_TZ3000_4fjiwweb variant)
- **Hub:** Home Assistant with ZHA
- **Method:** Automated test capture script with user-guided actions

### Test Session
- **Date:** 2025-11-15
- **Events Captured:** 147 total
- **Actions Tested:** 15 distinct physical interactions
- **Test Script:** [capture_ts004f_events.sh](../../../../tools/zigbee/capture_ts004f_events.sh)

### Actions Tested
1. Single click
2. Double click
3. Long press
4-7. Rotation (right/left, slow/fast) in Mode 1
8-11. Press + rotate (all combinations) in Mode 1
12. Triple-click → Mode 2
13. Rotation in Mode 2 (proving breakage)
14. Triple-click → Mode 1
15. Rotation verification (proving restoration)

---

## For Quirk Developers

### Device Signature
```yaml
Model: TS004F
Manufacturers:
  - _TZ3000_4fjiwweb
  - _TZ3000_qja6nq5z
  - Others

Clusters:
  - 0x0006 (OnOff)
  - 0x0008 (LevelControl)
  - 0x0300 (ColorControl)
```

### Custom Commands
The device implements Tuya-specific commands:
- `right` / `left` - Directional indicators
- `rotate_type` - Redundant direction (0=right, 1=left)
- `press_type` - Press type indicator (0=single, 1=double, 2=long)
- `attribute_updated` - Mode switching (attribute_id: 32772, attribute_name: switch_mode)

### Recommended Quirk Approach
1. **Expose Mode State** - Make `switch_mode` attribute visible in HA UI
2. **Document Mode Behavior** - Warn users that Mode 2 disables cluster 8
3. **Consider Quirk-Level Handling** - Could auto-restore Mode 1 or warn user

---

## Statistics

### Event Distribution
- **Button events:** 21 events (14%)
- **Rotation events:** 108 events (73%)
- **Mode switch events:** 2 events (1%)
- **Color control events:** 16 events (11%)

### Parameter Values Observed

**step_mode:**
- `0` (right): 60 occurrences
- `1` (left): 48 occurrences

**step_size:**
- `13` (slow): 42 occurrences
- `26` (moderate): 3 occurrences
- `52-78` (fast): 6 occurrences
- `91` (very fast): 1 occurrence

**transition_time:**
- `1` (fast): 38 occurrences
- `2` (moderate): 68 occurrences
- `3` (slow): 2 occurrences

---

## Automation Recommendations

### ✅ Recommended Patterns

**Dimming:**
```yaml
trigger:
  - platform: event
    event_type: zha_event
    event_data:
      device_id: YOUR_DEVICE
      command: step
      cluster_id: 8

action:
  - variables:
      direction: "{{ trigger.event.data.params.step_mode }}"
      amount: "{{ trigger.event.data.params.step_size / 2 }}"
  - service: light.turn_on
    data:
      brightness_step_pct: "{{ amount if direction == 0 else -amount }}"
```

**Color Temperature:**
```yaml
trigger:
  - platform: event
    event_type: zha_event
    event_data:
      device_id: YOUR_DEVICE
      command: step_color_temp
      cluster_id: 768
```

### ❌ Anti-Patterns

**Don't trigger on directional indicators:**
```yaml
# BAD - causes double-trigger in Mode 1
trigger:
  - platform: event
    event_data:
      command: right
```

**Don't use array indexing:**
```yaml
# BAD - fragile, unclear
value: "{{ trigger.event.data.args[1] / 2 }}"

# GOOD - named parameters
value: "{{ trigger.event.data.params.step_size / 2 }}"
```

---

## Tools

### Event Capture Script
[capture_ts004f_events.sh](../../../../tools/zigbee/capture_ts004f_events.sh)

Interactive script that:
- Guides user through 15 test actions
- Injects markers into log for correlation
- Supports retry on failed actions
- Outputs timestamped event log

### Log Formatter
[ha_zigbee_logfmt.sh](../../../../tools/zigbee/ha_zigbee_logfmt.sh)

Formats raw HA logs into readable ZHA event format.

---

## Related Resources

- **[Enhanced Blueprint](../../../../ha-assets/blueprints/tuya-ts004f/)** - Ready-to-use automation
- **[Home Assistant Community Post]** - Coming soon
- **[GitHub Issues](https://github.com/gunnjr/ha-resources/issues)** - Bug reports & questions

---

## Contributing

Found additional insights or tested other manufacturer variants?

**Contributions welcome:**
- Additional manufacturer variant testing
- Mode 2 use case discovery
- Quirk development
- Documentation improvements

---

## Citation

If you use this research in your own work:

```
TS004F Rotary Knob - Comprehensive Device Research
https://github.com/gunnjr/ha-resources/tree/main/research/zigbee/devices/tuya-ts004f
Based on 147-event analysis, November 2025
```

---

**Research Status:** Complete ✅ | **Blueprint Status:** Production-ready ✅

Commit message:

1) Fix blueprint errors preventing automation creation 2) Add option to track mode with input selector 3) Clean up references to mode in blueprint user instructions 4) Add sample automations code to repo 5) Add link to sample automation code in research notes 6) Add additional captured testing logs to repo

research/zigbee/devices/tuya-ts004f/README.md, after:

# Tuya TS004F - Comprehensive Device Research

Complete analysis of the TS004F rotary knob based on 147 captured ZHA events across 15 distinct physical actions.

---

## Quick Links

### Research Documents
- **[Event Catalog](research/ts004f-event-catalog.md)** - Detailed analysis of all 15 actions with automation examples
- **[Event Mapping (YAML)](research/ts004f-event-mapping.yaml)** - Structured machine-readable reference
- **[Event Coverage Audit](../../../../ha-assets/blueprints/tuya-ts004f/event-coverage-audit.md)** - Blueprint completeness analysis
- **[Blueprint Comparison](../../../../ha-assets/blueprints/tuya-ts004f/blueprint-comparison.md)** - Analysis vs community versions

### Captured Data
- **[Example Log](captured-logs/example-capture.log)** - Raw event capture from test session

### Ready-to-Use
- **[Enhanced Blueprint](../../../../ha-assets/blueprints/tuya-ts004f/)** - Production-ready automation blueprint

---

## Key Research Findings

### 🔴 Critical Discovery: Mode 2 Breaks Dimming

The device has two modes (triple-click to switch):

| Mode | switch_mode | Behavior | Recommendation |
|------|-------------|----------|----------------|
| **Mode 1** | 0 | Full cluster 8 support (dimming works) | ✅ **Use this!** |
| **Mode 2** | 1 | NO cluster 8 events (dimming broken) | ❌ **Avoid!** |

**Impact:** Existing community blueprints don't detect mode switches, leading to user confusion when dimming mysteriously stops working.

---

### 🎯 Speed Detection Parameters

Rotation events include speed indicators:

| Parameter | Value | Meaning | Blueprint Usage |
|-----------|-------|---------|-----------------|
| `step_mode` | 0 | RIGHT/clockwise (brightness up) | Direction |
| `step_mode` | 1 | LEFT/counter-clockwise (brightness down) | Direction |
| `step_size` | 13 | Single slow notch | ~6-7% brightness change |
| `step_size` | 26-52 | Fast rotation | Larger brightness jumps |
| `step_size` | 78-91+ | Very fast rotation | Maximum accumulation |
| `transition_time` | 1 | Fast rotation | 0.3s transition |
| `transition_time` | 2 | Moderate rotation | 0.5s transition |
| `transition_time` | 3 | Slow rotation | 0.8s transition |

**Finding:** Community blueprints only check `transition_time == 1`, mapping 67% of rotations incorrectly.

---

### 🐛 Double-Trigger Bug in Community Blueprints

Rotation generates 3 events:
1. `right` or `left` (directional indicator)
2. `rotate_type` (redundant directional info)
3. `step` (the actual dimming command)

**Bug:** Community blueprints trigger on `right`/`left` commands, causing:
- Mode 1: Both user action AND dimming fire (double-trigger)
- Mode 2: Only user action fires (expected, but inconsistent)

**Fix:** Only trigger on `step` commands (cluster 8).

---

### 📊 Event Clusters

| Cluster ID | Name | Purpose |
|------------|------|---------|
| 6 | OnOff | Button presses, directional indicators, mode switching |
| 8 | LevelControl | Brightness dimming (Mode 1 rotation) |
| 768 | ColorControl | Color temperature/hue (press + rotate) |

**Key Insight:** Press + rotate uses cluster 768, NOT cluster 8. Separate automation required.

---

## Complete Action Mapping

### Button Actions (Cluster 6)

| Physical Action | Primary Event | Secondary Events | Timing |
|----------------|---------------|------------------|--------|
| Single press | `remote_button_short_press` | `press_type: 0`, `toggle` | ~250ms between |
| Double press | `remote_button_double_press` | `press_type: 1`, `on` | ~250ms between |
| Long press | `remote_button_long_press` | `press_type: 2`, color commands | During hold |

### Rotation Actions (Mode 1)

| Physical Action | Events Generated | Best Trigger |
|----------------|------------------|--------------|
| Rotate right (any speed) | `right`, `rotate_type`, `step` | `step` with `step_mode: 0` |
| Rotate left (any speed) | `left`, `rotate_type`, `step` | `step` with `step_mode: 1` |

### Press + Rotate (Color Control)

| Physical Action | Events Generated | Best Trigger |
|----------------|------------------|--------------|
| Press + rotate right | `right`, `rotate_type`, `step_color_temp`, `long_press` | `step_color_temp` with `step_mode: 1` |
| Press + rotate left | `left`, `rotate_type`, `step_color_temp`, `long_press` | `step_color_temp` with `step_mode: 3` |

### Mode Switching

| Physical Action | Event Generated |
|----------------|----------------|
| Triple-click | `attribute_updated` with `switch_mode: 0 or 1` |

---

## Test Methodology

### Test Equipment
- **Device:** TS004F (_TZ3000_4fjiwweb variant)
- **Hub:** Home Assistant with ZHA
- **Method:** Automated test capture script with user-guided actions

### Test Session
- **Date:** 2025-11-15
- **Events Captured:** 147 total
- **Actions Tested:** 15 distinct physical interactions
- **Test Script:** [capture_ts004f_events.sh](../../../../tools/zigbee/capture_ts004f_events.sh)

### Actions Tested
1. Single click
2. Double click
3. Long press
4-7. Rotation (right/left, slow/fast) in Mode 1
8-11. Press + rotate (all combinations) in Mode 1
12. Triple-click → Mode 2
13. Rotation in Mode 2 (proving breakage)
14. Triple-click → Mode 1
15. Rotation verification (proving restoration)

---

## For Quirk Developers

### Device Signature
```yaml
Model: TS004F
Manufacturers:
  - _TZ3000_4fjiwweb
  - _TZ3000_qja6nq5z
  - Others

Clusters:
  - 0x0006 (OnOff)
  - 0x0008 (LevelControl)
  - 0x0300 (ColorControl)
```

### Custom Commands
The device implements Tuya-specific commands:
- `right` / `left` - Directional indicators
- `rotate_type` - Redundant direction (0=right, 1=left)
- `press_type` - Press type indicator (0=single, 1=double, 2=long)
- `attribute_updated` - Mode switching (attribute_id: 32772, attribute_name: switch_mode)

### Recommended Quirk Approach
1. **Expose Mode State** - Make `switch_mode` attribute visible in HA UI
2. **Document Mode Behavior** - Warn users that Mode 2 disables cluster 8
3. **Consider Quirk-Level Handling** - Could auto-restore Mode 1 or warn user

---

## Statistics

### Event Distribution
- **Button events:** 21 events (14%)
- **Rotation events:** 108 events (73%)
- **Mode switch events:** 2 events (1%)
- **Color control events:** 16 events (11%)

### Parameter Values Observed

**step_mode:**
- `0` (right): 60 occurrences
- `1` (left): 48 occurrences

**step_size:**
- `13` (slow): 42 occurrences
- `26` (moderate): 3 occurrences
- `52-78` (fast): 6 occurrences
- `91` (very fast): 1 occurrence

**transition_time:**
- `1` (fast): 38 occurrences
- `2` (moderate): 68 occurrences
- `3` (slow): 2 occurrences

---

## Automation Recommendations

### ✅ Recommended Patterns

**Dimming:**
```yaml
trigger:
  - platform: event
    event_type: zha_event
    event_data:
      device_id: YOUR_DEVICE
      command: step
      cluster_id: 8

action:
  - variables:
      direction: "{{ trigger.event.data.params.step_mode }}"
      amount: "{{ trigger.event.data.params.step_size / 2 }}"
  - service: light.turn_on
    data:
      brightness_step_pct: "{{ amount if direction == 0 else -amount }}"
```

**Color Temperature:**
```yaml
trigger:
  - platform: event
    event_type: zha_event
    event_data:
      device_id: YOUR_DEVICE
      command: step_color_temp
      cluster_id: 768
```

### ❌ Anti-Patterns

**Don't trigger on directional indicators:**
```yaml
# BAD - causes double-trigger in Mode 1
trigger:
  - platform: event
    event_data:
      command: right
```

**Don't use array indexing:**
```yaml
# BAD - fragile, unclear
value: "{{ trigger.event.data.args[1] / 2 }}"

# GOOD - named parameters
value: "{{ trigger.event.data.params.step_size / 2 }}"
```

---

## Tools

### Event Capture Script
[capture_ts004f_events.sh](../../../../tools/zigbee/capture_ts004f_events.sh)

Interactive script that:
- Guides user through 15 test actions
- Injects markers into log for correlation
- Supports retry on failed actions
- Outputs timestamped event log

### Log Formatter
[ha_zigbee_logfmt.sh](../../../../tools/zigbee/ha_zigbee_logfmt.sh)

Formats raw HA logs into readable ZHA event format.

---

## Related Resources

- **[Enhanced Blueprint](../../../../ha-assets/blueprints/tuya-ts004f/)** - Ready-to-use automation
- **[Sample Automation Code](sample-ha-code/automations.yaml)** - Sample automations that are triggered by TS004F Events
- **[Home Assistant Community Post]** - Coming soon
- **[GitHub Issues](https://github.com/gunnjr/ha-resources/issues)** - Bug reports & questions

---

## Contributing

Found additional insights or tested other manufacturer variants?

**Contributions welcome:**
- Additional manufacturer variant testing
- Mode 2 use case discovery
- Quirk development
- Documentation improvements

---

## Citation

If you use this research in your own work:

```
TS004F Rotary Knob - Comprehensive Device Research
https://github.com/gunnjr/ha-resources/tree/main/research/zigbee/devices/tuya-ts004f
Based on 147-event analysis, November 2025
```

---

**Research Status:** Complete ✅ | **Blueprint Status:** Production-ready ✅
